<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>LI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-51" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>THE REALMS OF COPPER, SILVER AND GOLD</h2>
			<p>Once upon a time there was an old man and his old wife, and they had three sons. One was called Egórushko Zalyót;<a id="r34"/><a class="c012 pginternal" href="#f34"><sup>[34]</sup></a> the second was called Mísha Kosolápy;<a id="r35"/><a class="c012 pginternal" href="#f35"><sup>[35]</sup></a> and the third was called Iváshko Zapéchnik.<a id="r36"/><a class="c012 pginternal" href="#f36"><sup>[36]</sup></a> The parents wanted to secure wives for them, and sent the eldest son out to seek a bride. He went for a long time, and saw many maidens, but he took none to wife, for he liked none well enough. On the way he met a three-headed dragon, and was very frightened.</p>
			<p>The dragon asked him, “Whither are you going, brave youth?”</p>
			<p>“I am going a-wooing, but I cannot find a bride.”</p>
			<p>“Come with me; I will take you where you may find one.”</p>
			<p>So they journeyed together till they came to a great heavy stone; and the dragon said to him: “Lift that stone off, then you will find what you are seeking.” And Egórushko endeavoured to lift the stone away, but he failed. Then the dragon said: “I have no bride for you here!”</p>
			<p>So Egórushko went back home, and he told his father and mother all he had gone through. And the parents reflected for a long time. And they at last sent Mísha Kosolápy on the same journey. He met the dragon after many days, and asked him to show him how he should get a bride. The dragon bade him go with him. And they came to the stone. Mísha tried to lift it away, but in vain; so he returned to his parents and told them all he had gone through.</p>
			<p>This time the parents were at an utter loss what they should do. Iváshko Zapéchnik could not have any better luck! But still Iváshko asked his parents’ leave to go to the dragon, and after some reluctance he obtained it.</p>
			<p>Iváshko met the three-headed dragon, who asked him: “Where are you going, sturdy youth?”</p>
			<p>“My brothers set out to marry, but they could find no brides. It is now my turn.”</p>
			<p>“Come with me; perhaps you may win a bride.”</p>
			<p>So the dragon and Iváshko went up to the stone, and the dragon commanded him to lift the stone up, and Iváshko thrust the stone, and it flew up from its bed like a feather, as though it were not there, and revealed an aperture in the earth, with a rope ladder.</p>
			<p>“Iváshko,” said the dragon, “go down that ladder; and I will let you down into the three kingdoms, and in each of them you will see a fair maiden.”</p>
			<p>So Iváshko went down, deeper and deeper, right down to the realm of copper, where he met a maiden who was very fair.</p>
			<p>“God greet you, strange guest! Sit down where you may find room, and say whence you come.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, fair maiden, you have given me nothing to eat and drink, and you ask me for my news!”</p>
			<p>So the maiden gave him all manner of meat and drink and set them on the table.</p>
			<p>Iváshko had a drink, and then said: “I am seeking a bride; will you marry me?”</p>
			<p>“No, fair youth! go farther on into the silver kingdom. There there is a maiden who is much fairer than I.” Thereupon she gave him a silver ring.</p>
			<p>So the young boy thanked her for her kindness, said farewell; and he went farther until he reached the silver kingdom. There he saw a maiden who was fairer yet than the former, and he prayed and bowed down low. “Good day, fair maiden!”</p>
			<p>“Good day, strange youth! Sit down and tell me whence you come and what you seek.”</p>
			<p>“But, fair maiden, you have given me nothing to eat or drink, and you ask my news!”</p>
			<p>So the maiden put rich drink and food on the table, and Iváshko ate as much as he would. Then he told her that he was seeking a bride, and he asked her if she would be the bride. “Go yet farther into the golden realm; there there is a maiden who is yet much fairer than I!” the girl said, and she gave him a golden ring.</p>
			<p>Iváshko said farewell, and went yet farther, went deeper still, into the golden realm. There he found a maiden who was much, very much fairer than the others, and there he said the right prayer, and he saluted the maiden.</p>
			<p>“Whither art thou going, fair youth; and what do you seek?”</p>
			<p>“Fair maiden, give me to eat and drink, and I will tell you my news.”</p>
			<p>So she got him so fine a meal that no better meal on earth could be wished, and she was so fair that no pen could write and no tale could tell.</p>
			<p>Iváshko set to valorously, and then he told his tale. “I am seeking a bride; if you will marry me, come with me!”</p>
			<p>So the maiden consented, and she gave him a golden ball. Then they went on and on together, until they reached the silver realm, where they took the maiden who was there; and they went on and on and on from there to the copper realm, and took this maiden with them as well. And then they came to the hole through which they were to climb out. The rope ladder stood all ready, and there there stood the elder brothers, who were looking for him. Iváshko tied the maiden out of the copper realm to the ladder, and the brothers lifted her out, and they let the ladder down again. Then Iváshko laid hold of the maiden from the silver realm, and she was drawn up, and the ladder let down again. This time the maiden from the golden realm came, and was also drawn up. When the steps were let down again, Iváshko sat on them, and the brothers drew it up into the height. But when they saw that this time it was Iváshko Zapéchnik who sat on it, they began to reflect: “If we let him out perhaps he will not give us any of the maidens.” So they cut the steps down, and Iváshko fell down. He wept bitterly, but it was no good. He went down farther, and he then came across a tiny old man, who sat on a tree stem and had a long white beard. Iváshko told him how it had been.</p>
			<p>The old man advised him once more to go on. “You will come to a little hut. Enter it and you will see a long man lying in it from one corner to the other. Ask him how you shall reach Russian land once more.”</p>
			<p>So Iváshko went up to the hut, stepped in and said: “Strong giant,<a id="r37"/><a class="c012 pginternal" href="#f37"><sup>[37]</sup></a> spare me, and tell me how I shall get home again.”</p>
			<p>“Fi, fo, fum, you Russian bones!” said Ídolishche, “I did not summon you, and still you have come. Go to the thrice-tenth sea, there there stands a hut on cocks’ legs in which the Bába Yagá lives. She has an eagle who will carry you.”</p>
			<p>So the young boy went on and on, a far way, to the hut, and he stepped in.</p>
			<p>The Bába Yagá cried out at once, “Fi, fo, fum, Russian bones, why have you come here?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, mother, the giant Ídolishche sent me to ask you to lend me your mighty eagle to carry me to Russia.”</p>
			<p>“Go,” said Bába Yagá, “into the garden. At the gate there stands a watchman; take his keys and pass through seven doors, and when you open the last the eagle will flap his wings. Sit on his back if you are not afraid, and fly away. But take meat with you and give him to eat whenever he turns round.”</p>
			<p>Iváshko did as he was bidden, sat on the eagle and flew away. The eagle flew on, flew on; then he soon turned his head round, and Iváshko gave him a bite of flesh. Then the eagle flew on afar, and turned round again, and Iváshko fed him. And he fed him until he had nothing more left, and Russia was still far off. Then the eagle turned round, and as he had no flesh, he tore a fragment out of Iváshko’s withers and ate it up. But they had already reached the aperture. When Iváshko parted from the eagle, he spat a bit of flesh out and bade Iváshko lay it on him. And Iváshko did so, and his body healed; and Iváshko went home, took the maiden from the golden realm from his brothers; and they then lived happily, and may still be living if they are not dead.</p>
			<p>I was there and I drank beer; I drank the beer, and it flowed up to my whiskers, but none of it reached my mouth.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
