<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Elijah the Prophet and St. Nicholas</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="elijah-the-prophet-and-st-nicholas" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>Elijah the Prophet and <abbr>St.</abbr> Nicholas</h2>
			<p>Once, a long time ago, there lived a peasant. He always observed <abbr>St.</abbr> Nicholas’ day, but never, never, that of <abbr>St.</abbr> Elias; he even worked on it. He used to say a <i>Te Deum</i> to Nicholas, and burn a taper, but never gave as much as a thought to the Prophet Elijah.</p>
			<p>One day Elijah and Nicholas were walking through this peasant’s fields, going along and surveying; and the ears were so large, so full, that it warmed one’s heart to look at them!</p>
			<p>“What a fine crop this will be!” said Nicholas. “Yes, and he’s a fine fellow, a good, brave peasant, pious; he remembers God, and reveres the Holy Saints. Whatever he turns his hand to shall prosper.”</p>
			<p>“Ha, let’s have a look, brother,” Elijah demurred. “Will there be so much over? My lightnings shall glint and my hail beat his field down; then your peasant shall learn right, and regard my name-day.”</p>
			<p>So they wrangled and argued, and at last agreed to go each his own way.</p>
			<p><abbr>St.</abbr> Nicholas at once went off to the peasant, and said: “Go and sell the Father by <abbr>St.</abbr> Elias’ all your standing corn: not a blade will be left; it will be destroyed by hail.”</p>
			<p>Up the peasant dashed to the pope: “Oh, <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">bátyushka</i>, won’t you buy all my standing corn? I’ll sell you my whole field; I am so short of money; take it and give it me. Do buy it, Father; I’ll sell it cheap.”</p>
			<p>They haggled and bargained, and at last agreed. The peasant took his cash and went home.</p>
			<p>Time went by⁠—not much, nor little; a heavy thundrous cloud gathered, and, with frightsome lightning and hail, played on the peasant’s field, cut through his crops like a scythe, and left not one blade to tell the tale.</p>
			<p>Next day, Elijah and Nicholas were faring through, and Elijah said: “Look how I’ve blasted the peasant’s field!”</p>
			<p>“The peasant’s field? No, my brother, no; you’ve done your work thoroughly; but it belongs to the pope by <abbr>St.</abbr> Elias, not to the peasant.”</p>
			<p>“What! That pope?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes; about a week ago the peasant sold the field to the pope, and got hard cash for it! And the pope is crying over the spilt money.”</p>
			<p>“That won’t do,” said Elijah; “I will grow the meadow anew⁠—’twill be as good as it was.”</p>
			<p>They had their talk out and went on their way.</p>
			<p>Up went <abbr>St.</abbr> Nicholas to the peasant once again. “Go and see the pope,” he said, “and redeem your field; you won’t lose by it.”</p>
			<p>The peasant went to see the pope. “The Lord has grievously afflicted you, has smitten your field with hail, as smooth as a board. Let’s share the cost of it; I will take back my field, and to relieve your loss will return you half the money.”</p>
			<p>Oh, how glad the pope was to consent! They shook hands on it at once.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile, somehow or other, the peasant’s field righted itself; new shoots sprang up out of the old roots, the rain poured down on them, and nourished the earth; wonderful fresh corn grew up, lofty and thick; not a weed to be seen; and the ears were so full that they bowed down to earth. The little sun warmed them, and the rye was warmed through, and waved like a field of gold. The peasant bound up sheaf after sheaf, built rick after rick; carted it away and stacked it.</p>
			<p>Just then Elijah and <abbr>St.</abbr> Nicholas were once more passing by. Elijah looked blithely at the field and said: “Just look, Nicholas, what a blessing I have wrought! This is my reward to the pope, and he’ll never forget it all his life.”</p>
			<p>“The pope! No, brother; it is a great boon, but then this is the peasant’s field; the pope hasn’t a rod of it!”</p>
			<p>“Wha-at?”</p>
			<p>“It is true. After the meadow had been battered by hail, the peasant went up to the pope and bought it back at half price.”</p>
			<p>“Stop a bit,” said the Prophet Elijah, “I’ll take all the good out of it; out of all the peasant’s ricks he shall not thresh more than six gallons at a time.”</p>
			<p>“Here, this looks bad,” thought <abbr>St.</abbr> Nicholas, and instantly went to see the peasant, and said: “See to it; when you start threshing, never take more than a sheaf at a time on the threshing-floor.”</p>
			<p>So the peasant set to threshing, and he got six gallons out of every sheaf; all his granaries and lofts were full up with rye, and still there was much left over; he built new storehouses, and filled them full to the flush.</p>
			<p>But one day Elijah the Prophet and <abbr>St.</abbr> Nicholas were passing by his courtyard, and Elijah glanced up and said: “Why has he built these new granaries? How can he stock them all?”</p>
			<p>“They’re full up,” <abbr>St.</abbr> Nicholas replied.</p>
			<p>“How did he get so much grain?”</p>
			<p>“Oho! Every sheaf yielded him six gallons, and, as soon as he started threshing, he brought them in sheaf by sheaf.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, my brother Nicholas!” Elijah guessed: “you must have told him what to do!”</p>
			<p>“Well, I thought it all out, and was going to say.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“What are you after? It’s all your work. Never mind; your peasant shall still have a reminder of me.”</p>
			<p>“What will you do?”</p>
			<p>“I shall not tell you this time!”</p>
			<p>“Well, if evil is to be, it will come.”</p>
			<p>Nicholas thought, and again went to the peasant, told him to buy two tapers, one big and one small, and gave him instructions.</p>
			<p>Next day Elijah the Prophet and <abbr>St.</abbr> Nicholas were out together in the guise of wanderers, and the peasant happened to meet them, carrying two waxen candles⁠—one big one that cost a rouble, and a little one that cost a kopek.</p>
			<p>“Where are you going to, peasant?” <abbr>St.</abbr> Nicholas said.</p>
			<p>“Oh, I am going to light the rouble taper to the Prophet Elijah; he has been so charitable to me. My field was ravaged by hail, so he intervened, <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">bátyushka</i>, and gave me a crop twice as good.”</p>
			<p>“For whom is the farthing dip?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, for <abbr>St.</abbr> Nicholas!” the peasant said, and pursued his way.</p>
			<p>“There you are, Elijah,” said <abbr>St.</abbr> Nicholas: “you said I gave everything away to the peasant; now you see what the truth is.”</p>
			<p>And with this the dispute was ended: Elijah the Prophet was reconciled, and ceased persecuting the peasant with hailstorms, so that he lived a merry life from that day and honoured both name-days equally.</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
