<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Glossary</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-75" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>GLOSSARY</h2>
			<p><i>Aspen.</i> Always associated with magic. Its trembling leaves give it a weird appearance.</p>
			<p><i>Bába Yagá.</i> Russian witch, also Yagá-Búra.</p>
			<p><i>Bábushka.</i> The grandmother.</p>
			<p><i>Bárkhat.</i> This word also means velvet.</p>
			<p><i>Bátyushka.</i> Father in a general sense, meaning anybody older. <i>Otéts</i> is father, meaning the relationship of father and son.</p>
			<p><i>Birds’ milk.</i> The Russian folk-tale expression for asking for the moon.</p>
			<p><i>Boyárs.</i> This may be translated earls, but in the Russian social scale it only meant the bigger men, the seigneurs.</p>
			<p><i>Boyárynyi.</i> Countesses, feminine plural of <i>boyár</i>.</p>
			<p><i>Chúdo-Yúda.</i> The Old Man of the Sea. This is a very clear loan from the Homeric Proteus.</p>
			<p><i>Dyádka.</i> Uncle. A term of respect.</p>
			<p><i>Egórushko Zalyót.</i> Means George the Bold Flier.</p>
			<p><i>Fatá.</i> A long silken glove.</p>
			<p><i>Gúsli.</i> A musical instrument, something like a zither with seven strings.</p>
			<p><i>Iváshko Zapéchnik.</i> Iván, who is always sitting behind the stove.</p>
			<p><i>Iváshechko.</i> A diminutive form of Iván.</p>
			<p><i>Iváshko.</i> A diminutive form of Iván.</p>
			<p><i>Izbá.</i> Hut.</p>
			<p><i>Kaftán.</i> A peasant’s overcoat, made very long.</p>
			<p><i>Khvalýnsk.</i> The old name of the Caspian. <i>Vide</i> Vazúza and Vólga.</p>
			<p><i>Korolévich.</i> King’s son. Koról, king.</p>
			<p><i>Korolévna.</i> King’s wife.</p>
			<p><i>Ksálavy.</i> Mythical birds, the meaning of which is entirely unknown.</p>
			<p><i>Mikháilo Ivánovich.</i> The popular name for the bear.</p>
			<p><i>Mísha Kosolápy.</i> Dmítri, the Bandy-legged.</p>
			<p><i>Morévna.</i> Of the sea.</p>
			<p><i>Nikíta.</i> From the Greek <span lang="grc">Νικήτης</span>, conquer.</p>
			<p><i>Pope.</i> Village priest.</p>
			<p><i>Pud.</i> A Russian weight. Thirty-six pounds avoirdupois.</p>
			<p><i>Sarafán.</i> A short sleeveless jacket, generally embroidered, worn over the bodice or the blouse.</p>
			<p><i>Sazhén.</i> A length of seven feet.</p>
			<p><i>Sebézh.</i> A city in the Vítebsk province, bordering on Poland. The Poles and the Mussulmen are all called infidels, Saracens or <i>Busormany</i>.</p>
			<p><i>Shúba.</i> A fur mantle.</p>
			<p><i>Stárosta.</i> Mayor of a town.</p>
			<p><i>Teléga.</i> A peasant’s cart without springs.</p>
			<p><i>Tsarévich.</i> Tsar’s son.</p>
			<p><i>Tyátya.</i> Daddy.</p>
			<p><i>Tzarévna.</i> Tsar’s wife.</p>
			<p><i>Ukaz.</i> Imperial edict.</p>
			<p><i>Ványa.</i> A diminutive form of Iván.</p>
			<p><i>Vertodúb.</i> The oak-turner, a gigantic figure.</p>
			<p><i>Vertogór.</i> The mountain-turner; a gigantic figure.</p>
			<p><i>Vóron Vóronovich.</i> Crow Crowson.</p>
			<p><i>Zamorýshek.</i> This name is freely translated Benjamin, the last-born son of an old man.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
